Hey, guys. Before we proceed onwards and start using Firebase Firestore to save our messages and send
messages over for storage, I wanted to quickly take a moment to do a Swift Deep Dive on something that
you might have seen in the last lesson that might still yet be a little bit confusing.
So notice how in this line here,
line 54,
we created a cell by calling this method at dequeueReusableCell withIdentifier.
We provided the identifier that comes from that cell that we created in the custom xib and we were
hoping that our table view would just create this cell and slot it in. But right at the end here,
we used this syntax "as!"
MessageCell.
What exactly does this do and what does it mean anyways?
So in this Swift Deep Dive, I want to talk about exactly this.
I want to talk about Type Casting because that's pretty much what that "as!" keyword does.
Now, recently, I went to this workshop in Wales in the UK where we were casting sword from stone. So adding
copper and tin into a crucible that was heated really hot, and then it was poured into this soapstone mold.
And after the metal cools down, you end up creating a completely different shape, right?
The shape of a bronze sword.
Now, there's a lot more to creating a bronze sword including two days of polishing the sword in Wales
which is freezing. But by the end, you create this beautifully, shiny mirror-like surface of a sword and
it was really really cool.
So how does this relate to what we're trying to learn? Now, as your coding and as you're looking at other
people's code, you might notice these keywords as, as question mark, as exclamation mark, and is.
And in this lesson, I want to explain to you what all of these keywords do, and when we would use them.
So here I've set up a playgrounds which has something that you should already be familiar with from
learning about classes and object-oriented programming
in previous lessons. Here we've got three classes created, one called Animal, one called Human, and one
called Fish.
The animals all have a name and when you create any new animal, you initialize that new object with a
name.
Now, we've also created our Human class to be a subclass of Animal.
It's inheriting from the Animal class.
So, that means all humans also get to have a name.
And, similarly, our Fish class is also inheriting from the Animal class.
So these are what you would call subclasses and this is the superclass.
Now, humans and fish can do all the things that animal can do which is why it inherits.
But it can also do some specialized things like humans might be able to code and fish might be able
to breathe underwater,
so there's really nothing new in this code here.
And if any of this looks unfamiliar, then I recommend having a quick revision of the lessons that we
did on classes and objects and object-oriented programming.
So, now that we've created our classes, let's go ahead and create some objects or instances from these
classes.
So let's say that I decide to create me,
so Angela as a human, and we automatically get this initializer from the superclass Animal class, because
human inherits from animal, and the name is going to be my name, of course.
And then let's create another human, let's create Jack who's also a human and his name is Jack Bauer.
And then, let's create somebody called Nemo.
Nemo is a fish.
And his name is Nemo.
Great.
So we've got three objects created from our classes, two humans and one fish.
So let's say that we decided to create a array called neighbours, and these neighbours who live really
close together are me, Jack, and Nemo. At this point,
we've created an array using objects of different types, right?
We've got Angela who has a type of human, Jack type of human, but Nemo has a type of fish, and they're
allowed to fit into the same array because they have a common superclass Animal.
So this neighbour's array is an array of Animal objects.
That means if I was to pull out an item, say, the item at index 0 from this neighbour's array, you'll see
that it still is an animal class.
It doesn't revert back to the human class, even though we know that this is definitely of type Human
because the array has mixed types. In order to store them in this mixed array,
they have to find some commonality and that is, of course, the Animal superclass.
So, now is where some of those type casting keywords come in handy.
Previously, we've seen type casting in the sense that we've able to create a double, let's say,
myDouble = 0.0, and let's just  do a quick old option click check, you can see this is definitely a
double data type. But if I wanted to create myDoubleAsAnInt, then I would use the int data type,
open up a set of parentheses, and inside here, I get to put in myDouble,
and it's able to cast this myDouble which has type double into something that has type int.
Now, this is not really quite type casting, even though it does, in fact, change the type of myDouble into
an Int.
This is actually achieved through initialization. So if we take a look at the documentation
for the Swift standard library,
you can see that under the document for int it has a whole bunch of initializers. And one of these initializers
is used for converting floating-point values such as doubles and floats.
And this particular initializer is the one that's responsible for creating a new integer object from
the double value, and it rounds towards zero. So without this initializer being created for Int,
then we wouldn't be able to do this and change the data type.
But in our case, if we wanted this neighbour1 to be treated as the human that it is, we have to do something
different.
So first thing we can do is we can check what data type it is.
So, for example, we can say if neighbour 0, which is this one, is of data type Human,
well, then we can print "First Neighbour is a Human." And if I go ahead and run this code, you'll see that
what I get printed is, in fact, this because neighbour 0 is indeed a human.
So we could perform this check and it tells us what data type it is.
And you can do this if you wanted to, say, you could check if Jack is human.
And the thing is we already know that Jack is human, and this is why when you try to write this code
which is extremely obvious already without any sort of checking the Xcode compiler, it will actually tell
you that this particular test is always going to be true, because there is no uncertainty about the data
type of Jack. Whereas in this case, when we're tapping into the neighbour's array where everything is of
type animal and we said, let's say, try to get the item at index 2, so 0, 1, 2, and we said, well, what if neighbours
at index 2 is human.
And then, in this case, we actually get nothing printed because neighbours at index 2 is in fact of type
fish.
So this "is" keyword, basically, allows us to have a object from a certain data type, and then check whether
if that object is of that data type. So in this case, if we had a cell created from a UITableVieCell,
and we check, if it is indeed that data type between the left-hand side of the "is"
and the right-hand side of the "is."
So this keyword is used for type checking. So let's say that I decided to go and create a function,
let's call it find Nemo.
And this function takes a input in the form of an array of Animal objects.
So we're going to say findNemo, from, as the external parameter name,
and then inside the function, we're going to refer to it as the animals.
So, now we've got our function created and we're going to go ahead and loop through our Animal's array.
So let's say for animal in animals.
So in this case, we're looping through the array animals and for every single animal in that array,
we're going to run the code in here.
We can either simply just print animal.name.
So this is pretty bog-standard sort of "for loop" kind of functionality that you've already learned about.
And in this case, when the code runs, when I call findNemo from our neighbours array, go ahead and hit
run,
then you can see that we've got all the names of our animals in our neighbours array being printed out.
So that's just a simple for loop.
But what if I actually wanted to find Nemo inside this array of animals?
Well, I could say that if the animal that we're currently looping on is of type fish, then that seems pretty
suspicious,
right?
Maybe that's going to be Nemo.
So let's go ahead and print that animal's name property.
So, now what will happen if I run findNemo from neighbours is that we're going to get Nemo printed out
because it's looping through all of the animals and checking each of them to see if they match the data
type of fish. And when it does, then it prints out the animal name.
Now, notice how, in this case, inside this set of curly braces, we're pretty certain that this particular animal
that we've currently got access to is definitely a fish,
right?
Because we've checked if this animal is a fish before we actually trigger this block. But notice how
in here, even though we're certain of that data type, we can't say something like, well, this a
nimal.breatheUnderWater because that's what all fish data types can do,
right?
They have this functionality breatheUnderWater.
But in fact it says, "Value of type 'Animal' has no member 'breatheUnderWater.'"
So in this case, what's happening is that this particular animal, even though we know it is a fish, we've
checked it. It still has that data type animal. So we're not able to tap into the specialized functionality
of the fish.
So what can we do in this case?
Well, we can use something called forced down casting where we cast from the Animal class down to one
of its subclasses.
Like in this case, fish.
So we could write something like let fish = animal as! Fish.
So what this now does is it takes that animal which we've already checked and made sure is definitely
of type fish, and we use the "as exclamation mark" to cast it down to one of the animals subclasses namely
the Fish class.
So, now with this fish created, we can now go ahead and tap into that method
breathUnderWater.
And when we run our code, you can see that Nemo is breathing underwater. So the "as exclamation mark" is
used when, let's say, we've created a cell which is still the UI Table of your cell which, remember,
is the superclass.
And then we wanted to turn it into a subclass, for example, on message cell that you saw in our code earlier
on.
Well, in this case, we can use the "as exclamation mark."
And now, this message cell object has converted or cast its data type into a subclass,
so going down, and this is called forced downcast.
Now, the problem with a forced downcast is that unless you're sure,
say, for example, in this case, we're pretty sure that this particular animal that matches the Fish data
type can be cast down into a Fish data type.
But let's say that you decided to cast the neighbour at index 1, which is Jack, to a fish.
So Jack's not going to like that very much.
But let's go ahead and try it.
Let's see what actually happens.
So, you'll notice that I'm not getting any warnings,
any problems, any errors at all
because this is perfectly valid code.
This is pretty much the same as if we did this, right?
The compiler can't tell that it's going to fail.
Now, we know because we can see right now what is at index 1,
but let me just show you what happens when I try to run this code.
You can see that it's at runtime, when your app is actually running in the user's hands,
when this line of code is going to crash. And it tells us that it could not cast value of type Human
to Fish.
So that's the problem.
Now, very often what happens is when we're dealing with data that we're getting back from the internet
or from APIs, they often have a JSON or some sort of array where we're not really quite sure what's
actually in it,
right?
Otherwise, we wouldn't be fetching it.
So in these cases, unless you're certain that this cast is going to work, then a better option is to add
a question mark, instead of an exclamation mark.
But what this does is it turns this object that's cast from this object to a Fish data type into an
optional.
So, now if I check this data type, you can see it's a fish question mark.
So that means if you wanted to be able to do something like a fish.breatheUnderWater, then you
will either have to use the optional chaining, like how it's inserted this question mark here which says,
basically, if fish is not nil, then call this method.
Alternatively, you would have to use a optional bind, say, if let the neighbour at index 1 can be cast as
a fish, well then go ahead and run this code.
Now, if I run this code again, you'll notice that it doesn't actually crash anymore because this is actually
being skipped. And in fact, I can add an 'else" statement to print that "Casting has failed."
So let's run that code and you can see that it's the "else" case that gets triggered in this block of
code. So the "as" keyword is a slightly safer way of performing this down casting capability, instead of
simply just saying, "Yeah, yeah, you know cell is definitely gonna be convertible to message sell in all cases"
when you're not sure it's better to actually use a "as" question mark.
So this way, we only actually do the casting if it actually can be cast as the subclass. Whereas in this
case, we can be pretty certain to downcast because we know that the animal is definitely a fish.
Now, in other cases where you've written the code, say, you've created the array, you know what each of
the items are, then you can also make the case that a forced downcast, in this case, is probably okay.
So, the last keyword I want to show you is this thing called "as." For example, in this case, we know that this
fish object has data type fish, right?
But what if we wanted to turn it back into the data type of its superclass?
Well, we can say, let animalFish = fish as, with no question mark or no exclamation mark,
and then we can cast that to one of its superclasses.
So in this case, we could say, turn it into an animal. And this takes the object which has the class Fish
and raises up to the animal superclass.
So now this animalFish has type animal, whereas it came from this object fish which had the subclass
fish data type.
So the "as" keyword by itself is simply used to raise a object to its superclasses type.
So it's another form of casting but it's, perhaps, use a little bit less frequently.
And the reason why it doesn't need to have an exclamation mark or a question mark is because when you
take a subclass object and you convert it into a superclass, it's never going to fail.
This is always going to work as long as this particular object that you're trying to cast is, indeed,
inheriting from the data type that you're trying to cast it to.
In other words, the "as" keyword is used to perform an Upcast.
That said of casting is performed a lot less frequently than down casting, but it belongs in the set
of as, as, as,
so it's a good idea to talk about it.
Now, the very last thing I want to talk to you about is some of these strange data types that you
might have come across.
This is a topic that's closely related type casting and working with types in general.
Sometimes you don't want to be specific about the data type that you're working with.
Sometimes you'll want flexibility and you'll want your code to accept a range of different data types.
And in Swift, we have something called "any" which encompasses all objects, so objects derived from classes,
from structs. Basically, it can be any data type just like the name.
Now, within that group of any data type, there is a subclass of AnyObject data types, and these are object
that have to be derived from classes.
So sometimes you'll see certain protocols that have a requirement where only an object created from
a class can actually conform to that protocol,
so they might use this data type "AnyObject" in that way to limit things to work with classes. And then
even more specialized are these "NSObjects" which are the objects that are created from the foundation
classes.
So remember how we often import foundation. Well, inside that foundation module, we get access to NSNumber,
and as dates, file manager, and a whole bunch of other objects that Apple has created.
So if we were to head back to our code and where we've got this array of objects, right?
If I was to create, say, just like an integer, right? Let's call it num and let's make it equal to 12,
and I tried to add this number to our array of neighbours, then you'll see that it's not really going
to allow me to do that because there's absolutely no commonality between all of these guys.
The only way that I can do this is actually by making my array of type Any.
So if I had an array of type Any, then this is gonna be fine. "Any" allows us to mix any type, literally.
In this example, we're mixing the human type, the fish type, and an integer type because Angela and Nemo
are instances created from classes, whereas the integer is created from a structure.
So this keyword "any" allows us to mix classes and structures or any other data type. So what happens when
I change Any to AnyObject?
Now, we get an error.
Why.
Well, the reason is that AnyObject restricts the types to those that come from classes.
So in other words, structures are no longer allowed to play and they're no longer allowed to be part
of our collection. And integers, strings, and doubles,
these are all structures which is why we get this error. And I can show this to you in another way.
Let's say there our fish Class was instead a structure and structures, of course, don't have inheritance,
so I have to delete all of this. But there we go,
we've got our Nemo which is created from fish. But right now, if I try to run this, this also gives me an
error.
It says that Nemo which has type 'Fish' can't be converted to AnyObject because AnyObject requires that
the object be created from a class, like the Human class, where Angela and Jack are created from. But Nemo
is created from the Fish struct which is not an AnyObject.
Now, let's say we changed this to NSObject which means that we're even more limited as to what can
go into our array.
Neither Angela, Jack, or Nemo actually fit these criteria because we need to use one of the classes and
foundation that's created by Apple.
So, for example, let's say I decide to create a number that's created from the NSNumber class and I set
it to equal to 12,
or let's say I create a word that's created from the NSString class and I set it to ABC, well, these items
can go in here,
right?
I could put "num" and I could put "word" and if I take out "Nemo," then you'll see that this is perfectly
valid.
These are both NSObjects that can match this particular requirement. But as soon as I try to add
in a struct, for example, on Nemo, or if I try to add in a Human, which is created from our class, none of
these will be allowed.
So, essentially, depending on how strict your criteria is, you can actually go through these very broad
types:
Any, AnyObject, and NSObject, and allows you to create collections of items that are more broad than
just the classes that we've created ourselves.
So, now that you've learned all about typecasting, I have a small reading assignment for you.
So if you have some time, I recommend heading over to this link which you'll be able to find in the course
resources,
and just having a read of this page on typecasting to get a little bit more background information and
learn a little bit more about this topic. So consider it an optional assignment.
All right, in the next lesson, we're going to be using Firebase to save and retrieve data from the Firebase
Cloud Firestorm.
And when we retrieve the data back, we'll have to use some form of casting in order to convert it into
a data type that has the capabilities that we need.